# Aligning Data Debt with AI-Integrated Software Project Lifecycle Processes: A Standard-Based Mapping Approach

## Authors
- Nilay YORGANCILAR AKGÜL
- Tuğba TAŞKAYA TEMİZEL
- Özden ÖZCAN TOP
- Pelin DAYAN AKMAN

## Abstract
Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies have become increasingly central to software development, enhancing efficiency with tools such as intelligent code assistants and driving innovations in products like chatbots, recommendation engines, and predictive analytics. Despite these advancements, the inherent complexity of AI-integrated software projects often leads to the accumulation of technical debt (TD), which can compromise the reliability and sustainability of systems in the long term. Managing TD effectively in these projects can be achieved by adapting international standards. Although these standards are not designed for TD management, they can be systematically applied to detect and address TD by aligning with AI system lifecycle processes. The aim of this study is to demonstrate how AI-related TD correlates with various AI lifecycle processes, thereby enabling systematic detection and management of TD in AI-integrated software projects. To achieve this, we studied 73 unique cases of TD, each reflecting either an instance or a root cause of data-related TD. These cases were subsequently mapped to the processes and activities outlined in the ISO/IEC 5338 AI Systems Lifecycle Processes standard. Subsequently, the accuracy of these mappings was validated bidirectionally by a large language model and two domain experts. Our findings revealed that data-related TD categories are associated with a diverse range of processes such as design definition, quality management and human resource management and tend to accumulate more significantly in certain areas within the AI lifecycle. This study not only serves as a proof of concept for developing a management approach for AI-related TD, but also enhances the body of knowledge on managing TD in AI projects by detailing how TD interacts with and impacts various AI lifecycle processes.

## Dataset
### Research Design: Data Collection and Analysis
The primary goal of the data collection and analysis was to identify and categorize TD in ML-based development projects through a systematic approach. To accomplish this aim, the Design Science Research (DSR) methodology was used, which is well suited to create successful artifacts to solve observed problems (Peffers et al., 2007). Participants were deliberately chosen to represent diverse backgrounds, roles and management levels, in the data and ML domain. Additionally, participants were drawn from various sectors and business domains to provide a holistic view of TD challenges across different contexts. 
Semi-structured interviews were conducted as this format allows flexible follow-up questions to explore the issues discussed by participants in more depth (Patton, 2015). To address the potential difficulty of comprehending the TD concept, the interviews avoided direct references to "technical debt", but were centered around the "issues". At the start of each interview, demographic information was collected regarding each participant, company and the chosen ML project. The participants were asked to describe the challenges, underlying root causes and interim solutions they had implemented. All sessions were recorded with the participants’ consent. Following the interviews, the recorded sessions were transcribed into text. The finalized transcripts were analyzed using thematic analysis which involved systematically assigning codes to text segments to capture key information related to TD in ML projects.  During the coding process, the primary parent codes were categorized as TD issues, suboptimal solutions, and ideal solutions. Each identified case was assigned a unique code, and its corresponding root causes were organized as child codes under the relevant case. To ensure data familiarization, coding was managed at the participant level. When multiple participants referred to similar problems, their insights were consolidated under the same case ID. This method maintained the coherence of the dataset.

### References
K. Peffers, T. Tuunanen, M. A. Rothenberger, and S. Chatterjee, “A design science research methodology for information systems research,” Journal of Management Information Systems, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 45–77, 2007.
M. Q. Patton, Qualitative Research & Evaluation Methods: Integrating Theory and Practice, Sage Publications, United States of America, 2015.
